[CHIMES]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> I'm Raymond Moody.
And these are my thoughts
on near-death experiences.
Near-death experiences
are a common pattern
of conscious experience
that occurs to people
who are on the verge of death.
For example, in a
cardiac arrest from which
they are resuscitated.
And basically they
consist of elements that
are common all over the world.
Not every person has
all of the elements.
But among the things
that people say
are that they hear the
doctors say something like,
oh my god, he's dead--
or we've lost her.
Which is very
surprising to them,
because they say
that I have never
felt so alive as when I heard
that doctor say I was dead.
Because from their
point of view,
they feel that they
distance themselves
from their physical body.
And they watch the scene
of the resuscitation
typically from a point
of view above it.
As this progresses, they
eventually wake up to the fact
that, oh, this must be
something to do with death.
And at that point, they enter
into states of consciousness
that no matter how
articulate they may be,
they say there are
no words for it.
That it's ineffable,
or indescribable.
They go through a passageway
into a beautiful light.
They feel comfort,
peace, and joy.
They meet relatives and friends
of theirs who have died.
And they go through
panoramic memory,
in which everything
they've ever done
is displayed around
them in a sort
of holographic,
three-dimensional panorama.
And they come back
from these experiences
with a total new take
on life, thinking
that the most important thing
we can do while we're here
is to learn how to
love, and saying
that they have no
more fear of death,
because they feel
that death is just
a transition into
some other reality.
Not everybody who comes
close to physical death
has a near-death
experience in the interim.
And it's very difficult
to get an estimate of what
percentage of people do.
Because somewhere between 20%
and maybe 50% to 60% of people
who come close to death have
a near-death experience.
But not everybody reports it.
And also, we have no idea
why some do and some don't.
For example, some ideas that you
might have naturally, like it's
the religious basis, right?
However, religious people
do, and religious people
don't have near-death
experiences.
Or people who say that they
had absolutely no exposure
to religion prior to a cardiac
arrest may have an experience.
So it doesn't seem
to have anything
to do with the age
of the patient.
And it doesn't
have anything to do
with the illness or injury that
brought somebody to near death.
So we really don't know
why some do and some don't.
One of the more
puzzling features
of near-death
experiences is that it
happens fairly regularly
that while they are out
of their body in the hospital,
the patients will tell us
that they go to some
other part of the hospital
or maybe even some place
outside of the hospital
entirely and are able accurately
to report what happened.
For example, I had this
wonderful friend, Vi Horton,
who had a cardiac arrest during
surgery for a gallbladder
and had a cardiac arrest that
lasted 20 minutes, according
to her doctor.
Now, when Vi was
out of her body,
she was going out in the
hall in the hospital.
And in an area of
the hospital, she
saw her brother-in-law, who
was standing there alone.
And as she was watching him,
a friend of the brother-in-law
came up and said, what
are you doing here?
And her brother-in-law
said, well,
I was going to Athens
today to see Uncle Henry.
But it looks like Vi is
going to kick the bucket.
So I'm staying around to be
a pallbearer at her funeral.
Several days later,
when her brother-in-law
came to the hospital to visit
her after she was revived,
Vi said to him, well,
the next time I die,
I want you to go on to Athens
to see Uncle Henry because I
will be fine.
And I interviewed that
brother-in-law at depth
about that.
And he said that totally
changed his life.
Now, this is a
fairly common thing
that patients will
tell us these things,
seeing things about
the resuscitation scene
that they shouldn't
have been able to see.
The difficulty is how in the
world do you establish that?
There have been these schemes
of let's put things up
on the shelf above in a
resuscitation room, so
that if the patient happened
to be out of their body,
and they could report
this, then we would know.
But you see, I am
both a medical doctor
and a philosophy professor.
And some of the things
that I hear coming out
of medical doctors' mouths
about thinking through things
like this are
extraordinary to me,
because there are
enormous difficulties
in that kind of approach.
I have even heard some people
say that we could prove life
after death if we could get
a few of these verifications
from a distance.
But the trouble is
that that in no means
would show that there
is a life after death,
because it wouldn't prove that
after the body was finally
irreversibly dead
that this could occur.
And also because
near-death experiences
of a transcendent nature occur
in some dimension of reality
that is totally displaced
from this physical realm
that we're in.
So you couldn't
prove the existence
of a transcendent
life after death
by proving that somebody
saw something while they
were out of their body here.
But I'm not trying to say
these aren't impressive.
I mean, I do feel
that they occur.
The next step is,
well, how do we know?
And that is a very difficult
thing to establish.
So what I would say
in answer to the
what is it that leaves your
body at the point of death?
It is the "I" that is the
subject of your story.
Because as soon as
you're out of your body,
you're out of this story.
And I had a famous
actress, Broadway actress,
that I knew who had
had this experience.
And she had had a
role on Broadway
that she played for a
long period of time.
And she became
identified with the role.
And she said the last night
she walked off the stage
and she was leaving
that role behind,
she said then flash forward
to her near-death experience.
And she said that was
as close as she could
get to a description of it.
It's like that getting
out of your body
is just getting out of this
role that you're in and headed
towards some other role.
But in some cases you get
pulled back into the same role.
And people say that
it is very difficult
to describe what is that
transformation of identity that
takes place when you go from
this realm of existence, which
is time and space, to a state
of existence that is not
based on temporal
or spatial features.
But rather, the
closest people can
get to it is they say it's
like information and love,
that everything is either
information or love.
And that whereas in
this world, in order
to get a piece of
information I might
have to go to a computer or a
book, that in that dimension,
apparently just to formulate
the thought that you
want to know something
zaps it into your purview.
Consciousness is about as
far down on the word scale
as you can get in terms of
getting a definition of it,
right?
Consciousness is
narrative-directed.
That is, in your life, when
some new event takes place
in your life that you're
conscious of, what
you do is you weave it into
your longer life story.
When you get out of your
body into this other realm,
you still at that point
still have some contact
with this culture that you're
in and the narrative that you're
in.
But what I want to
know is, what about
when you get into a
timeless, faceless existence?
Because a narrative
necessarily involves
the notion of time and space.
If there's no time
and space, how
could you continue anything like
the kind of conscious existence
we have now?
And I just really have to say,
I'm baffled, and I don't know.
But what I am really
impressed by is people
that I've talked with who've
had these experiences,
they say they still exist.
They're still themselves.
And yet, there's no
time and no space.
And I don't know how to
put that together yet.
Near-death experiences affect
people very profoundly.
And they have certain kinds
of predictable effects.
The most dramatic
one is that whatever
they are chasing in life--
and I have spent my
life chasing knowledge.
Some people spend their life
chasing power or money or fame
or any of these other things.
But it's striking
to me that whatever
they have been chasing in
life, when people come back
from this experience, they say
that what this is all about
is learning to love.
And they say that is what comes
forward in your life review.
Now, I also
immediately want to say
that they say also that it
doesn't make that any easier.
My friend George Ritchie,
the first living person
I ever knew who had
had this experience,
said, Raymond, this experience
makes your humanity,
even more of a burden in a way.
And to translate George's
words into my vernacular,
because I've heard this
from a lot of people, what
he was saying is,
let's face, it's
very difficult to get
through the average day
without wanting to choke at
least one other person, right?
And that reality stays the same.
So they come back realizing
the importance of the quest
to learn to love and yet
still find themselves
in a human situation.
So that's one after effect.
The other after effect
is people say that it
eliminates the fear of death.
Not that they would want to die
in a painful or unpleasant way,
but from their experience, they
interpret death as a transition
into some other and more
desirable realm of existence.
So they have no
more fear of death.
Now, another after effect,
which is much rarer,
but there are lots
of cases of it,
because there are lots of people
with near-death experiences,
but it is inspiration
to artistic creativity.
For example, in
upstate New York at NYU
is Dr. Anthony Cicoria, who is
PhD in physiology, and an M.D.,
and an esteemed professor
of orthopedic surgery.
And in 1996, Anthony,
at a family reunion
was struck in the neck by a
bolt of lightning in a telephone
booth and had a cardiac arrest,
and got out of his body,
went around and was able
to accurately report
to the people in
the family reunion
what they were doing while
he was out of his body.
But after he came
back from this,
developed an interest in the
piano, which he had never
had before, and kept having
a recurrent dream in which he
was playing the same piece
of music on a concert stage.
And then a friend of his just
one day came by and said,
I'm going out of
town for a year,
and I need somebody to
take care of my piano.
Would you do it?
He said, well, OK.
So he started taking
piano lessons.
And now, in addition to
being an esteemed professor
of orthopedic surgery, Anthony
is an acclaimed concert
pianist.
I've interviewed quite a
number of people over the years
who, after their
near-death experience,
had some new talent that
they didn't know about.
And the most common
one is people
say it makes them more
perceptive about other people.
I remember this woman
named Frances Stokes who
was a receptionist for one of
my dad's medical friends, who
told me about her near-death
experience when she was 11.
And she said after that she has
this, not like a psychic thing,
but this ability.
She said, for example,
when she steps
on an elevator with somebody,
that she can sort of
feel their being and maybe feel
some of their pain or something
or what's going on with them.
And I hear that a lot.
I think that creativity
is a part of us
that has to do with some
other realm of existence.
That is definitely
how it feels to me.
So I think creativity,
I can easily
imagine why that would be
something that would be stirred
up by a near-death experience.
There is one
inference you can make
from near-death experiences
with complete certainty that
is astonishing.
And it has to do with
this life review.
Because people say
at a certain point
that the physical environment
kind of disappears,
and everything that
they've ever done
is surrounding them in a
sort of holographic panorama.
And that there is no time,
that they're in a standstill.
No time, and everything they've
ever done is there around them.
And when they witness
it, they don't review it
through the eyes they had
when they did the action.
Rather, they are
embedded empathically
in the consciousness
of the person
with whom you interacted.
So in this review, if you've
done something hurtful
to somebody, then
you are that person
and you feel directly
and empathically
the sadness you brought
about in that person's life.
Or if you did something
kindhearted to someone, then
you feel the good feelings.
Now, knowing that, we
can make an inference
from that that is
really quite startling.
And that is that at
least for some of us,
life is a two-phase
process, right?
First, we go through it forward
as the actor, or protagonist.
Then time stands still.
There's a 180-degree turnaround.
And you witness the same
actions from the point of view
of the other characters.
Now to me, this is
extraordinary in itself,
that we can know for sure
that at least for some of us,
life is a two-phase process.
Now, beyond that, what happens
is that somebody who comes back
from that, therefore, are
they in a third phase of life?
Well, the Ancient Greek
Philosopher Heraclitus
said they were,
because he talked
about these people who had been
apparently dead and returned.
And what he said about
them was that these people
are appointed to watch over
the living and the dead.
And that is often
the feeling that I
get from these people with
near-death experiences,
that they're kind of
one foot in this world
and one foot in someplace else.
And so how did they
get back from this?
Well, the story varies.
Some people say
they have no idea.
At one moment, they were in
this light and then this state
of heightened consciousness.
The next moment, they
were back in their bodies
with no sense of transition.
Then another group of people say
that somebody there told them
you have to go back-- it
could be a dead relative;
it could be this being of
complete compassion that
they're with--
that you have to go back.
And they say, I don't
want to go back.
But they're forced to go back.
Because they said,
you're not finished yet.
Very frustrating
for them is the fact
that they never are told why it
is that they have to go back.
They are not told what
they have to finish.
In the passage of
time, they often say,
I can see now why
I was sent back.
But I didn't have access
to it at that time.
A third group are people
who are given a choice.
They say that they
were told, you
can either go on
with the experience
you're having, or you can
go back to the life you've
been leading.
And not too surprising-- all
the ones I've talked with who,
you know, chose to come back--
but the reason they
give is phenomenal.
And that is in
almost every case,
it is that they come back
on behalf of somebody else.
They say that, for
myself, I wanted to stay.
But I chose to go back.
And most commonly,
it's because they
have young children
left to raise
or some other loved
one that they feel
that they need to take care of.
It's a really interesting
thing when people see
their relatives who have died.
I mean, this creates
all sorts of paradoxes.
One is, for example, they
say that they don't see them
at any particular age.
They say that it's
that you recognize
that that is the person who
was Aunt Matilda or whoever.
But it's not like you
see a physical presence.
And nonetheless, it has a
kind of geometry, like a form,
and that you recognize
from the feelings
and the memories who
this is, despite the fact
that there's no
physicality to it.
Let's say that, as many think,
after a near-death experience,
there is reincarnation.
So what sense does it
make that Aunt Matilda may
be reincarnated
somewhere in Nebraska,
but that she is appearing to
me in my near-death experience
as Aunt Matilda?
What is going on?
Well, these
contradictions do sort of
vanish, however, if you
think about the fact
that this is a timeless
framework of existence.
The reason why there appears
to be a contradiction between
saying that my aunt appeared to
me in a near-death experience
and is nonetheless
reincarnated at that time--
that is only
contradictory if you're
assuming that there is
such a thing as time.
And one of the neat things
about being in my age,
which is 74 now, is you realize
there is no such thing as time.
I mean, I had figured that
one out as a philosophy
undergraduate.
But here, it really
becomes an item
of immediate personal
experience at a certain age.
So time is just part of
the framework of this thing
that we're in.
It does not really have an
independent existence apart
from the physical dimension.
And people in
near-death experiences
say that the state of
consciousness they are in
doesn't have a time component.
People regularly tell you
that they chose to come back,
that they were given a
choice to come back or not.
And they chose to come back.
And so that raises some
interesting anomalies
for the medical profession.
Like you spend all of this
time in your education,
and you spent all this hour
trying to revive the person,
and then the person
comes back and says,
oh, I chose to come back.
Well how do you fit these
two things together?
And a matter of
fact, I would go on
to say that they don't
have a clear solution,
as long as we stay within
the framework of Aristotelian
logic, that we've got to
learn how to think logically
about things that are
beyond the literal
and don't make
any literal sense.
To me, the most
interesting single aspect
of the near-death experience
is the life review,
that somebody could
go through experience
and see everything
they'd every done
and review it from
the point of view
of the other people involved,
and that no time passed,
and that it totally
changed their lives.
That, to me, is just phenomenal.
Negative experiences occur.
And they are much
smaller in number.
The Gallup poll that was
done on this in 1979,
is I remember the 3, but
I can't remember if there
was a point in front of it.
But it's either 0.3% or 3% of
the experiences they gathered
were negative.
And that coincides very nicely
with my experience with this.
Now, there are all
kinds of questions
that come up with this.
Number one is, is this an
under-reporting problem?
I mean, personally I would
be very reluctant to say,
you know, Doc, when I
died, I went to hell.
So maybe not as many
people report that.
And then another
difficulty with it
is that, whereas the positive
near-death experiences seem
more homogeneous,
the negative ones are
spread out all over the place.
There doesn't seem to be an
internal coherence to them.
And there are three major
categories of negative ones.
One, in which it starts just
like any other near-death
experience--
all the same things--
except rather
than feeling it to be a good
thing, that people experience
it dysphorically.
But then as it proceeds,
then it changes
into a positive
near-death experience.
Another type in which there
are hellish visions and flames.
And those seem to be
the rarest of all.
I talked to an
elderly man who had
been riding on the back of
a wagon when he was a kid.
And he fell and had some
sort of horrible head injury.
And he had visions.
He said it was like there
were these puffs of flame
jumping up all around him.
But it was just very
vague, you know,
and not anything very specific.
The ones that I've heard are
just very patchy like that.
It's not like anything.
Kind of like what I would
call a delirium, where
the images may be very vivid.
But they don't really
fit together very well.
I've talked to lots of people
with near-death experiences
because of suicide attempts.
And the common factor is that
they say that they would never
attempt it again.
And when I asked
them why, they say
it's not because
they felt that they
would end up in any sort
of hell or anything.
But rather, that just
as with any other thing
you've done in
your life, that you
would have to witness the
after effects of your action
on your loved ones
who were left behind.
And also people
saying-- and in fact,
a couple of people have
used the same analogy--
that it was kind of like walking
out in the middle of the movie.
That if it had completed,
that the sadness would
have been that they
would never have
known how that particular
life would have played out.
People who go through
a near-death experience
definitely don't come back with
the idea of the Old Testament
God and the raging and
the fury and so on.
People describe a being of
complete compassion and love.
Some years ago, I went to
China and then to India
a year or so later.
And in both cases,
I was expecting
to hear something different.
But what I was astonished by
was that I heard the same thing
in India, for example,
with the Hinduism,
as I hear in the United
States from people
who are Jewish or
Christian or whatever.
So I think that the
religion aspect of it
really doesn't factor into it.
Except that people will say--
they say, since
there are no words,
then I'm forced to use the
words from my tradition.
But it's not like that
it's the words don't really
have that sense they
do in their religion.
And people say that
after this they
have no more interest
in denominations
or that there is more of a
personal relationship with God,
rather than an
ideological religion that
comes to the fore with this.
Culture may play a role in the
articulation of the experience.
But it usually comes
with the admission
that it's not adequate,
that it's just the only ones
available to them.
So where you're
from doesn't matter.
It's like being a human being is
pretty much the same all over.
And not to degrade cultural
things, which are wonderful,
but we are still just
these basic beings.
I definitely think that
near-death experiences
do transcend culture.
All over the world, there's
this collective story
of leaving one's body and
going on a sort of trip.
Like it's basically
a travel narrative,
if you think about it, like
a journey to another world.
But there's a very strange
paradox involved in that.
And that is that we all know
the meaning of a travel story.
We all love travel stories.
But doesn't the travel
story depend for its meaning
on space and time?
So there's a very
real disconnect there.
That's kind of the
situation we are
in with near-death experiences,
because the story is
very moving.
I got out of my body.
I went through a
tunnel into a light.
I came back to my body
and returned to life.
That's a travel narrative.
But the whole presupposition
is that it's not
spatial or temporal.
The question that
obviously arises
is what relationship do these
near-death experiences have
to the experiences
people have under DMT
or various kinds of
psychedelic agents and so on?
One very interesting thing
about those compounds
is that they exist in
relationships to human beings.
And so it would make a
certain amount of sense
that we would seek things
in the environment that
would reproduce this amazing
experience that we have.
I am completely
confident in saying,
yeah, the physical
world is an illusion.
And it makes me sound
psychotic, and that's all right.
Because if they haul me
away to a mental hospital,
that's an illusion too, and
maybe a very interesting one,
right?
I mean, we're not
putting the world down
by saying that it's illusory.
To me, it just
gradually dawned on me--
and after talking with thousands
and thousands of people--
that this is a reality.
For years, I just didn't know.
I mean, I accepted perfectly
that the people were telling me
the truth, that they
were being sincere.
And I also knew
that it had nothing
to do with oxygen
deprivation to the brain,
because one of my own
medical school professors
told me about having
this experience
when she was
resuscitating her mother.
So this is an illusory
narrative-driven thing
we're in.
And where I have
come in my thinking
about it is that apparently
we finish this one story,
and then we go through some
incomprehensible process,
and then, I gather, we're
back on another storyline.
Well, I've never had an interest
in convincing anybody else
that there's an afterlife.
But in terms of what
I think, I'm in.
I mean, to my utter surprise,
there is a life after death.
And what I would advise
people on the basis of that
is slow down a little
bit and enjoy life,
because this is a really unique
and interesting experience.
You're going to get
out of it alive.
And you're going to have some
really interesting things
to review in your life.
So don't be afraid of death.
It's not anything
to be scared of.
But stay here as long
as your sentence is.
Because when you get out of
here, it will make sense.